Now for the conclusion of this code challenge.
There are two more exercises left, both involving new analyses and additional visualizations.
So the goal here of exercise four is to take the analysis code from exercise three and put it in a for
loop over all of the hidden states layers.
Remember that there are 25 hidden states layers in Gpt2 medium.
So you can create that scatterplot that we saw in the in exercise three.
You can create that 25 times organized into a matrix of plots that is five by five.
So plot both the internal and terminal punctuation marks for covariance on the x axis and mutual information
on the y axis.
So yeah, a five by five grid of subplots.
You can label each of the plots, so title each of these plots according to the layer index.
So the first few are obviously going to look something like this.
And you already know what layer 20 looks like from the previous exercise.
So the question is what does the transition look like in between layers one and layer 20.
Now notice also that layer zero has only two dots in it.
That is not a bug.
It is a sensible and expected result.
But it might not be so immediately obvious why that should be the case.
So your goal here is to make sure you understand why you get this particular result.
So that's for exercise four.
Again one more exercise after this one.
That's just some additional visualizations.
But for now As usual, pause the video and get to work.
And now I will switch to code.
So here for this.
Big for loop.
Here triple for loop.
Normally you would like to avoid triple for loops but it just happens sometimes.
Anyway, this is all code you've seen before.
Copy pasted from exercise three.
And I'm just embedding it inside this loop over all of the layers.
And then here I'm initializing this.
So mutual information internal all for all the layers.
Mutual information terminal and then covariance internal and covariance terminal.
And then I have just a little bit of text here to print out the progress.
And this will take I don't know ten minutes or something.
So that actually took 15 minutes to calculate.
And that was with using the manual implementation of the mutual information, which we know from a couple
videos ago, is much faster than the scikit learn implementation.
In fact, I don't think you could even do this analysis with the scikit learn implementation unless
you did some fancy stuff and had access to a better processor.
By the way, I did also try running this analysis completely on the GPU instead of on the CPU, and
it actually didn't really save much time.
There's just so much back and forth between the GPU and the CPU that yeah, it didn't really save all
that much time anyway.
So we got through all of the layers.
So let's now make this big scatter plot.
So here I'm looping through all 25 plots.
I'm not actually plotting every single data point just because it's a lot.
I'm skipping every seventh and it's just to make the plotting code look go a little bit faster without
really losing much information.
Okay.
Yeah.
So I have a five by five array of axes here.
I'm flattening them.
That's just to make the loop work a little bit easier.
And then I'm plotting all of the dots.
Okay.
So a couple of things we see.
First is that this really strong clustering does seem to shift.
So we get clustering both for the internal and the terminal punctuations.
And basically all of those clusters start to merge by around layer I don't know 789 something.
So somewhere around one third of the way through the transformer.
And then yeah there's really less and less clustering.
Something different happens at the very end.
The very last layer right before we get to the layernorm and the embeddings matrix all the way at the
end that you see very often, you'll continue seeing throughout the rest of this course and your analyses
that the very end, the very last last transformer block tends to look a little bit different, qualitatively
different from the earlier transformer blocks.
Now, why do we see only two dots here and not a, you know, sort of cloud of dots as we see for all
the other layers?
So the answer to this conundrum is that layer zero here is the embedding.
So this is the token embeddings plus the position embeddings.
Now the token embeddings are exactly identical in every sequence in these batches.
And the reason is that at the level of embeddings token embeddings, the model hasn't yet started processing.
So every token is treated as a unique token.
And if you have two commas and those are treated as exactly the same, There's no context that is,
uh, integrated across the different tokens.
That only starts happening when you get into the first transformer block.
And furthermore, the positions are exactly the same.
So the way that we created these batches, the punctuation marks are always at position 21.
So the punctuations are the same.
The positions are the same in every sequence in these two batches.
So therefore you only get two actual data points here.
In fact there are you know underlying this looks like one dot, but it really is 250 divided by seven
because I'm only plotting every seventh.
But there's like many dozens of dots here that are all perfectly overlapping.
By the way, when I create my slides, I normally take screenshots, but this figure was just too big
to fit into one screenshot, so therefore I exported it as a PNG.
So if you're curious how to export these figures and PNG format, then this is how you do it.
Just make sure that this line is above the plt.show.
Otherwise matplotlib will create a brand new empty plot and save that.
So you want this before plt.show.
Okay, now that you know, I haven't yet answered the question of what these clusters mean, why they
are there, and why they merge together.
To understand why that is, you would need to do some deeper investigations into these different clusters.
So, for example, what you could do is perform a clustering analysis using DBscan or K-means.
Actually, K-means would work quite well here.
And then identify the sentences, the sequences that contain each of these.
For example, I'm just looking at the red ones here.
Each of these three clusters and then put those together, separate those, print them out and see if
you can determine what is similar between these text snippets that is dissimilar from these, and what
is similar for these that is dissimilar to these and so on.
So it would take quite a bit more investigative work to determine what these what's really driving this
clustering.
If you do that you could actually follow you could track these clusters throughout the rest of the layers.
So for example, you could give them different colors corresponding to each of these clusters and then
continue coloring all of these dots here, uh, according to the three different clusters.
And maybe you find that they all mix together.
Maybe they still are separated, just not clearly clustered, like as if they are forming three different
layers in these plots over here.
I don't actually know what the answer is.
I haven't tried that analysis.
If you would like to do it and report to the Q&A, then that would be fantastic.
I'd be curious to know what that analysis looks like.
And finally, exercise five.
The goal of this exercise is to visualize all the data that you have already calculated, but in a slightly
different way.
Here I want you to create histograms for covariance and mutual information.
I'm showing one plot here so you can see what it will look like.
So this is for mutual information.
Each line is a distribution that comes from a histogram for the different layers.
And the color of course indicates the layer.
Now in this case I'm only showing data for the internal punctuation marks.
So the terminal punctuation marks are actually not shown in this figure at all.
You can also recreate this figure for the terminal marks.
That's great.
I'm just using one punctuation type here for simplicity.
Anyway, this top left plot is the same as the bottom one, but this shows covariance.
This shows mutual information.
Now these are the distributions over all of the mutual information or covariance values from within
the layer.
And here on the right column I've plotted the average of those metrics for each of the layers.
So these are scatter plots hidden behind the red curtain here.
So the one for mutual information, for example, you can already tell that the scatter plot here is
going to go down.
Average mutual information as a function of the layer because you already see that here.
So these lines go these distributions go purple down to yellow.
So as we increase the layer number.
So as we go deeper into the model the average mutual information is getting lower.
It's getting smaller.
So we can already expect that this scatter plot will start somewhere higher.
And then go down as we increase in depth into the model.
And then the question is whether the covariance and mutual information look basically the same as each
other.
So that's it for this exercise.
And that will actually finish off this code challenge.
Here is the loop over all of the different layers.
Here I'm getting the histogram.
So the distribution of covariance here I'm getting the histogram for mutual information.
And again I'm only using the internal punctuation marks here.
That's really just to make the plot a little bit easier to look at.
Okay, so then I get the histogram and I'm immediately plotting the histogram and also plotting the
average over all of the non-zero values in the matrix.
So we have the whole distribution.
And then we have the mean of the distribution for covariance and for mutual information.
And then the rest of this stuff is just making the plot look a little bit nicer.
Okay.
So what do we see here.
Well, this plot I already showed and basically what we see is that mutual information goes down so
we can see it going to the left as we go deeper into the model.
Now, this is not the information that we can really gather from the figure for exercise four, because
I removed all of the axis ticks and labels here.
So you don't actually see the numerical values in here.
You see the relationships, you see the lack of clustering in later layers and the clustering in the
earlier layers.
But this is all qualitative.
So that's why now we can actually look at these distributions with these labeled axes.
And here we see that as we go deeper into the model the mutual information goes gets lower.
Now this one data point at hidden layer zero.
This comes from the embedding.
So we we should know not to trust this one.
There's only really two unique values here.
So we can just ignore this value here and really just focus on this pattern over here.
So mutual information goes down.
Uh on the other hand the covariances go up.
And you see that here in this plot here.
So, uh, the yellow lines.
So in general, the lines are getting yellower as we go to the right.
That's the opposite of mutual information.
And here it's super clear the covariances are shooting up to the moon for, uh, as we go deeper into
the model again, something different always happens at the very, very end of the model when we're
right at the final unembedding matrix.
Now the question is why does this happen?
Why do we see increases in covariances but decreases in mutual information?
Now, to gain some insight into this seeming discrepancy, we have to remember a couple of things.
One is that we have to remember that covariance incorporates the scale of the data.
So the data scale remain in the covariance.
Now in this case, all of the the scale of every one of these data points is the same its activations
squared because we have activations, times, activations.
But importantly, we know from earlier exercises from earlier just investigating the model that the
variance tends to increase as we go deeper in the model.
So the covariances are increasing because the variances themselves are increasing.
If you want a normalized measure of the linear relationships that is scale independent, so has the
scale basically averaged out or normalized out.
What you can do is divide the covariances by the product of the variances of the two separate variables.
And what is that?
That is literally just the Pearson correlation coefficient.
So if you like this is not part of this code challenge.
But if you are curious if you want to do a little bit more work here, you can try normalizing this
covariance to see if you get a to transform this into a correlation.
So you're plotting here the correlations instead of the covariances.
And then you can see if those correlation values also decrease in a way that's more similar to the mutual
information decreases with increasing depth into the model.
I hope you found this code challenge intriguing.
As I've mentioned many times before, a precise interpretation of these curious findings would require
a lot more time and work than what we have just done here.
That is often the case with scientific research, especially of complex systems, and I hope that this
video, and really the rest of the course inspires you to continue investigating complex systems like
LMS.
One final point I want to stress here is something that I mentioned several videos ago and just, you
know, said also in the code a moment ago, which is that mutual information has units of bits or nats,
and that is a unit that is independent of the scale of the data.
And covariance, on the other hand, has units of activations squared, which means that if the activations
themselves are becoming more variable.
So if the standard deviation of the data is increasing, then the numerical values of covariance will
also increase.
Now that's not a problem.
It's not even a limitation.
In fact, that is an important aspect of many applications of covariance.
But it is something you need to keep in mind when you are comparing a statistical quantity that preserves
the units of the data relative to a statistical quantity that does not preserve the units of the data.